# Topic Modeling Project (DLBDSEDA02) 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) analysis of NYC 311 complaints using LDA and NMF to extract interpretable topics that support municipal decision-making.

 ---
# Project Overview
This project performs topic modeling on a subset of the NYC 311 Service Requests dataset (City of New York, 2025).
The goal is to automatically extract dominant themes in citizen complaints, such as noise, infrastructure, and quality-of-life issues—using:
1. Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA)
2. Non-Negative Matrix Factorization (NMF)

# Setup instructions

## 1. Clone this repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/CRMawande/topic_modeling.git
cd topic_modeling
```

## 2. Create and Activate Virtual Environment

```bash
python -m venv venv
# On Windows:
.\venv\Scripts\activate
# On macOS/Linux:
source venv/bin/activate
```

## 3. Install Dependencies

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## 4. Prepare data folder

```bash
mkdir data
mkdir data/raw
mkdir data/processed
```

## 5. Download NYC 311 dataset

[Click to Download](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1NxW0CtMR2aY2IEiVG8gqit1Smb9mvIdv/view?usp=sharing)

Save csv here:
```bash
data/raw/
```

## 6. Running the Project

Execute notebooks in order:

1. data_preparation.ipynb
- Cleaning
- Language Checks
- Tokenization, lemmatization
- Saving processed text

2. vectorization.ipynb
- TF-IDF matrix creation
- CountVectorizer matrix
- Saving sparse matrices and vectorizers

3. topic_modelling.ipynb
- LDA topic search using coherence
- NMF topic search using coherence
- Evaluation and visualization (word clouds, pyLDAVis)

 ---

# Notes on Data

Raw datasets are NOT included due to GitHub’s 100MB file limit. Add your own copy of the NYC 311 CSV in data/raw/.
Processed files in data/processed/ are automatically generated by the notebooks.

 ---

 # References

Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet Allocation.

Lee, D. D., & Seung, H. S. (1999). Non-negative Matrix Factorization.

City of New York (2025). 311 Service Requests from 2010 to Present. NYC Open Data.
